CONTRIBUTING.rst, before:

Contributing to MNE-Python
==========================

MNE-Python is maintained by a community of scientists and research labs, and
accepts contributions in the form of bug reports, fixes, feature additions, and
documentation improvements (even just typo corrections). The best way to start
contributing is by `opening an issue`_ on our GitHub page to tell us about
errors you are encountering or to discuss your ideas for changes. For general
troubleshooting, you can also write to the `MNE mailing list`_ or chat with
developers on the `MNE gitter channel`_.

Changes are typically made by `forking`_ the MNE-Python repository, making
changes to your fork (usually by `cloning`_ it to your personal computer,
making the changes, and then `pushing`_ the local changes up to your fork), and
finally creating a `pull request`_ to incorporate your changes back into the
shared "upstream" version of the codebase. The `contributing guide`_ has more
details on how best to configure your workflow for a smooth experience
contributing to MNE-Python.

Users and contributors to MNE-Python are expected to follow our `code of
conduct`_.


.. _`opening an issue`: https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-python/issues/new/choose
.. _`MNE mailing list`: http://mail.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/mailman/listinfo/mne_analysis
.. _`MNE gitter channel`: https://gitter.im/mne-tools/mne-python

.. _`forking`: https://help.github.com/en/articles/fork-a-repo
.. _`cloning`: https://help.github.com/en/articles/cloning-a-repository
.. _`pushing`: https://help.github.com/en/articles/pushing-to-a-remote
.. _`pull request`: https://help.github.com/en/articles/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork

.. _`code of conduct`: https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-python/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md
.. _`contributing guide`: https://mne-tools.github.io/dev/install/contributing.html

Commit message:

MRG, DOC: Update contrib guide (#7097)
* WIP update contributing guide

* refine bug reporting guidelines

* add git setup diagram

* mention dangers of PYTHONPATH

* fix typo

* more on PYTHONPATH

* clarify dev environment setup steps

* tweaks

* remove self-referential crossref

* add "origin"

CONTRIBUTING.rst, after:

Contributing to MNE-Python
==========================

MNE-Python is maintained by a community of scientists and research labs, and
accepts contributions in the form of bug reports, fixes, feature additions, and
documentation improvements (even just typo corrections). The best way to start
contributing is by `opening an issue`_ on our GitHub page to discuss your ideas
for changes or enhancements, or to tell us about behavior that you think might
be a bug in MNE-Python. *For general troubleshooting of scripts that use
MNE-Python*, you should instead write to the `MNE mailing list`_ or chat with
developers on the `MNE gitter channel`_. Users and contributors to MNE-Python
are expected to follow our `code of conduct`_.

The `contributing guide`_ has details on the preferred contribution workflow
and how best to configure your system for a smooth experience contributing to
MNE-Python.


.. _`opening an issue`: https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-python/issues/new/choose
.. _`MNE mailing list`: http://mail.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/mailman/listinfo/mne_analysis
.. _`MNE gitter channel`: https://gitter.im/mne-tools/mne-python

.. _`code of conduct`: https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-python/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md
.. _`contributing guide`: https://mne-tools.github.io/dev/install/contributing.html
