.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, before:

---
name: Bug report
about: Create a report to help us improve.

---

Detailed instructions on how to file a bug can be found in our [FAQ](https://mne.tools/dev/overview/faq.html#i-think-i-found-a-bug-what-do-i-do).

If your issue is a usage question, please consider asking on our [Gitter channel](https://gitter.im/mne-tools/mne-python) or on our [mailing list](https://mail.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/mailman/listinfo/mne_analysis) instead of opening an issue.


#### Describe the bug
Please provide a clear and concise description of the bug.


#### Steps and/or code to reproduce
Please provide a code snippet or [minimal working example (MWE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimal_Working_Example)
to replicate your problem.

This MWE should be self-contained, which means that other MNE-Python contributors
should be able to copy and paste the provided snippet and replicate the bug.
If possible, use MNE-Python testing examples to reproduce the error. Otherwise,
provide a small and anonymized portion of your data required to reproduce the bug.

If the code is too long, feel free to put it in a [public gist](https://gist.github.com) and link
it in the issue.

Example:

```Python
import mne

fname = mne.datasets.sample.data_path() + '/MEG/sample/sample_audvis_raw.fif'
raw = mne.io.read_raw_fif(fname)
raw = mne.concatenate_raws([raw])
raw.save('test_raw.fif', overwrite=True)
raw_read = mne.io.read_raw_fif('test_raw.fif')  # this breaks
```


#### Expected results
Provide a clear and concise description of what you expected to happen.


#### Actual results
Please paste or specifically describe the actual output or traceback.


#### Additional information
Paste the output of `mne.sys_info()` here.

Commit message:

MRG, DOC: Update contrib guide (#7097)
* WIP update contributing guide

* refine bug reporting guidelines

* add git setup diagram

* mention dangers of PYTHONPATH

* fix typo

* more on PYTHONPATH

* clarify dev environment setup steps

* tweaks

* remove self-referential crossref

* add "origin"

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, after:

---
name: Bug report
about: Tell us about broken, incorrect, or inconsistent behavior.

---

**READ THIS FIRST:** If you are having trouble getting MNE-Python to work with
your own data, you should probably ask for help on our
[Gitter channel](https://gitter.im/mne-tools/mne-python) or on our
[mailing list](https://mail.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/mailman/listinfo/mne_analysis)
before opening an issue; you will get help faster that way. See
[the FAQ entry on filing bug reports](https://mne.tools/dev/overview/faq.html#i-think-i-found-a-bug-what-do-i-do)
for more guidance. If you're pretty sure your problem is a bug in MNE-Python,
**delete this section** and fill in the headings below, replacing the
placeholder text with your own responses. Surround any code samples with triple
backticks above and below the code block, or put code in a
[public gist](https://gist.github.com) and link to it in the issue.


#### Describe the bug
〈Replace this text with a clear and concise description of the bug.〉


#### Steps to reproduce
〈Replace this text with a code snippet or minimal working example [MWE] to
replicate your problem, using one of the [built-in datasets], preferably the
one called [sample]. If you can't replicate on a built-in dataset, provide also
a link to a small, anonymized portion of your data that does yield the error.〉

[MWE]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimal_Working_Example
[built-in datasets]: https://mne.tools/dev/overview/datasets_index.html
[sample]: https://mne.tools/dev/overview/datasets_index.html#sample


#### Expected results
〈Replace this text with a clear and concise description of what you expected to
happen.〉


#### Actual results
〈Replace this text with the actual output, traceback, screenshot, or other
description of the results.〉


#### Additional information
〈Replace this text with the output of `mne.sys_info()`.〉
